The tulip's flowers are usually large and are actinomorphic (radially symmetric) and hermaphrodite (contain both male (androecium) and female (gynoecium) characteristics), generally erect, or more rarely pendulous, and are arranged more usually as a single terminal flower, or when pluriflor as two to three (e.g. Tulipa turkestanica), but up to four, flowers on the end of a floriferous stem (scape), which is single arising from amongst the basal leaf rosette.

In structure, the flower is generally cup or star-shaped. As with other members of Liliaceae the perianth is undifferentiated (perigonium) and biseriate (two whorled), formed from six free (i.e. apotepalous) caducous tepals arranged into two separate whorls of three parts (trimerous) each. The two whorls represent three petals and three sepals but are termed tepals because they are nearly identical. The tepals are usually petaloid (petal-like), being brightly coloured, but each whorl may be different, or have different coloured blotches at their bases, forming darker colouration on the interior surface. The inner petals have a small, delicate cleft at the top, while the sturdier outer ones form uninterrupted ovals.[5]

The flowers have six distinct, basifixed introrse stamens arranged in two whorls of three, which vary in length and may be glabrous or hairy. The filaments are shorter than the tepals and dilated towards their base.[10] The style is short or absent and each stigma has three distinct lobes, and the ovaries are superior, with three chambers.[10]

Colours
Tulip flowers come in a wide variety of colours - reds, yellows, purples, white - except pure blue (several tulips with "blue" in the name have a faint violet hue), and do not have nectaries.[7][8][9][10] The colour of a tulip is formed from two pigments working in concert; a base colour that is always yellow or white, and a second anthocyanin colour. The mix of these two hues determines the visible unitary colour. The breaking of flowers occurs when a virus suppresses anthocyanin production and the base colour is exposed as a streak.[5]

While tulips can be bred for many of colours, black tulips have historically been difficult to achieve. The Queen of the Night tulip is close to black, though it is a dark and glossy maroonish purple.[5] The first truly black tulip was bred in 1986 by a Dutch flower grower in Bovenkarspel, Netherlands. It was created by cross-breeding two deep purple tulips, the Queen of the Night and Wienerwald tulips.[11]

The "Semper Augustus" was the most expensive tulip during the 17th-century tulip mania. After seeing the tulip in the garden of Dr. Adriaen Pauw, a director of the new East India Company, Nicolas van Wassenaer wrote in 1624 that "The colour is white, with Carmine on a blue base, and with an unbroken flame right to the top". With limited specimens in existence at the time and most owned by Pauw, his refusal to sell any flowers, despite wildly escalating offers, is believed by some to have sparked the mania.